The Great Patriotic War
Здравствуйте товарищи! - Greetings comrades! I always loved war history. I have grown up fantasizing about Viking invasions, Charlamagne conquests, 100 years’ war, Napoleonic wars, second world war. But I never liked school way of teaching history. Giving no actual explanation how warfare, politics, economy was organized during the time period, textbooks usually emphasize on facts, names and dates killing any possible love towards history that students might have had. Fortunately for me I was exposed to a lot of historical strategy games, using one of which I want to tell great story of the victory in the second world war, a story, somewhat alternative to regular textbook style.
Great Patriotic war was part of 2nd world war, and it constituted the largest military confrontation in history between Soviet Union and Axis powers in European side. We will look to the situation from Soviet Union perspective, starting from political situation.
Political life (Great Purge and Stalin’s paranoia)
In 30s and 40s social -political life to say the least was super unstable. After having secured power, Stalin was (at least, officially) quite worried about potential saboteurs, wreckers, counter-revolutionaries, spies, and so on. Being “worried” about potential activities against him, Stalin gave green light to a period of extremely harsh political repression among civilians, the military and even among the Communist party: A period, which later will be called “The Great Purge”.
In the game the Great Purge is represented with a Paranoia system. If Stalin's Paranoia reaches a certain level, he will start killing random generals, commanders, political figures, but you can spend resources to lower the level of Paranoia. For example, you can forge a satisfactory production report for Stalin. He will be happy, but at the other hand you will lose economic power and potential.
It's interesting system, as you want to minimize number of innocent people killed by Stalin, with a minimum amount of resources spent. On the right side you can see people Stalin ended up killing in “my universe”.
Soviets even went as far as sending their operatives to kill Stalin’s main political rival Trotsky, who escaped to Mexico. To stop the purge in the game, you have to do the similar assassination attempting operations. Stalin only calmed down, after killing, arresting, deporting thousands of people, including a lot of innocent civilians and generals, weakening Soviet Union before upcoming war.
After a lot of old generals got purged, they got replaced by a new, less experienced generation. As a result, before the war started most of Soviet generals were in there 30-40s.
In comparison Germany knew neither the civil war which could divide the society, nor emigrations of the officers, nor repressions.
In the Wehrmacht (armed forces of Germany between 1935-45), there were many commanders with many-year experience of leading troops.
Most famous example was Hoth, tank army general who was 56 years old, when USSR invasion began. Because of his age soldiers called him "Father Hoth". Other generals were not exception either: In 1941,
“Father Hoth”“Father Hoth”Guderian was 53 years old, Hoepner was 55 and Kleist was 60. German generals were also chosen based on their skill, rather than party belonging (although the once not in the party were blamed later for losing the war :D).
“Father Hoth”
“Father Hoth”
Talking about Soviet’s agency, it’s important to mention, that it was one of the most powerful agencies in the world (probably second after British) and it had very significant role in supporting partisans in occupied territories and stealing German plans, during the war time.  Below you can see my spy network in the Germany, before the war has started.
Economy
Before 20th century, in terms of industrialization Russian empire was always behind other Western countries, such as Britain, France, Germany or US. For example, officially slavery in Russia ended only in 1861, way after in other European countries at the time.
After Russian empire collapsed civil war started, which even worsened economy. In 1920s Soviet Economy was in ruins. And the way they decided to overcome this was by heavy industrialization with five-year plans. Five-year plans, mostly focusing industrial sector, were basically a goals set for five years period to be completed. USSR concluded agreements with foreign companies, mainly American (Ford, General Electric...) and German (Krupp, Borsig...) to carry out industrialization.
Later in Soviet history these goals for five years plans will be set low and then for propaganda reasons media will be talking about completing these goals and even overdoing five years plans. But in reality, the goals were set so low, then even overdoing them, wasn't a big deal or anything to be proud of. So, after the second World War five-year plans will become one of the most central symbols of Soviet corruption, but so far they were a good step forward for organizing Soviet industrialization.
Another important part of the industry is research. The Russian Academy of Sciences, founded in the 1700s, became the highest scientific institution in the Soviet Union after the revolution. National academies appeared throughout the 20th century in the Union republics, and in the game, you can decide to build them, gaining additional research speed and more possibilities for innovations.
Before the war Soviets had huge variety of tanks and planes, with their unique spare parts. This unorganized production, created difficulties, as it was harder to find specific pars and some parts were even made in very few factories only. Loosing these factories meant that hundreds to thousand tanks will stay without repair parts. To fix this problem, Soviets decided to merge some military factories together, to simplify production. In the game you can make similar decisions merging some factories and simplifying production.
Aviation
During the 1930s, the Soviet government funded missions to break numerous world aviation records. Aviation achievements and records became demonstrations of the USSR's technological progress and Soviet media continuously exalted record-breaking pilots.
However, Soviet aviation was far from being in as good a shape as the Soviet media seemed to indicate. In fact, it was plagued by mismanagement, inefficiency and technologically deficient equipment, and very inexperienced pilots leading to a staggeringly high accident rate (in early 1941, prior to the war, apparently 2-3 planes on average were lost daily due to accidents). Men not in communist party, or women overall were not allowed to become pilots. And existing pilots were so inexperienced that before start of the war 15% of the pilots flew a plane only once. ONCE! ONCE!
This resulted in a catastrophic failure just after one day into the war: Soviet air force lost over 1100 planes in one day, which was over 25% of the planes they had. During the first year of the war Soviets completely lost war in the air. But later by increased production, more reasonable training of the pilots, by allowing everyone to be able to become a pilot and by a serious allied help, soviet won battle in the air.
In game you have certain decisions, which given you have enough time and willingness to provide resources for, will result in certain historical and non-historical improvements in the air force. One of them which I enacted was to allow women to air force. In the game this gives you ability to recruit famous scarry women pilots (see the pictures below), famously called Night witches - Ночные ведьмы. Btw Sabaton has a pretty good song about Night witches, highly recommended (https://youtu.be/jcemHIqmkYI)
Symbols of victory: T-34s, Katyusha rocket systems, Cossack cavalry and Zhukov
I am sure some of you might be familiar with the legendary T-34, most famous and most heavily produced tank of the entire human history. These were the tanks, which defended Moscow, completed Stalingrad encirclement, took Berlin and after the war they became one of symbols of victory.
In the game you are given a tank designer, which you can use to create your desired tank from available parts. Above you can see the tank I have designed. Historically T-34s were also given a shovel to be able to be dug themselves during the defense.
Famous tactic used by Soviets throughout war was to dig and hide tanks alongside the roads. When the German tanks start crossing the road first and the last tank of the column were shot (As shown in the picture below). In case of first and last tank being successfully destroyed the rest of the tanks in the middle were blocked, and then Soviets can shoot them one by one.
Another symbol of victory rocket launcher Katyusha. This delivered huge amount of explosives to targeted area, especially having huge physiological effect on the enemy. Katyusha-s were also super mobile, they can easily fire on enemy positions, then reallocate before being located by enemy counter artillery units.
Germans tried to copy idea, creating rocket launcher on their own (Panzerwerfer 42 picture on the left). But it ended up suffering from reliability issues: never being as successful as Soviet version.
There is also a song called Katyusha, that I think everyone from post-Soviet countries have heard: https://youtu.be/MLg83QMmlGs
The game also has another variation of this song, specifically written for the game: https://youtu.be/xSjnN39Qhmc
And there is even Rammstein version for the song Katyusha in German: https://youtu.be/khgJftnrNw0
Cossack cavalry units probably are third most famous cavalry unit throughout history after Mongolian cav and Winged Hussars (Polish cav). And surprisingly they were still used during second world war. But cavalry charges were not effective during this time period units were mostly using horses to move faster, but they were still fighting on foot. But bravery of this units was one of the most astonishing during the war.
That is why I decided to restore Cossack units in my universe, as Soviets did historically.
According to Ethan Arsht’s WAR scores (picture below) Georgy Zhukov (above) is 9th best military general in all of history (of course Napoleon is the 1st - Forever an idol ❤️) and he is the only WW2 general in this list. What was special about Zhukov was that he was everywhere: in 1941 he was the one who successfully repelled German attack on Moscow, in 1942 he participated in organizing 3 most important Soviet offensives (offensive in Rzhev, Stalingrad offensive, operation to break the siege of Leningrad) and personally led the Stalingrad offensive the most successful one out of the three. Victory in Stalingrad led to encirclement of the Germany’s 6th army, and completely tides of the war. Nazi Germany was unable to continue war of exhaustion, having less oil, less natural resources, less economical power and less manpower it was keen to lose, if soviets just continued their dedicated defense. Zhukov eventually led operation to capture Berlin (btw biggest operation in human history: 3.5 million people involved)
Massive assault and early failures
During second world war era, every army in the world followed one of the four doctrines to build their army. They were similarities between these doctrines, but they significantly differed from one another in few major factors. All doctrines had basically everything air force, artillery, tanks, special forces, but what differentiated them, was on which aspect was the main focus. “Mobile warfare” doctrine which Germany follow emphasized breaking the enemy lines with tank formations and then encircling them, after which moving forward aggressively (so called Blitzkrieg).
Another two doctrines paid main focus on 1) special forces, artillery, air force and coordination between these forces [USA and Britain followed], and 2) mostly heavy entrenchment and planning [France followed].
4th one: Mass assault which Soviet Union followed, mostly didn’t value lives of individual people. Keyway to advance was through Human wave offensives and Guerrilla Warfare. In Stalingrad for example some Soviet troops were only given one rifle and 3 bullets, as if they were meant to die before firing those 3 bullets. I have personal bias against this doctrine, some people in military might argue, that having immense manpower and other resources, this was viable doctrine for Soviet Union and China, but anyway this doctrine never valued people. Doctrine is one of the reasons Soviet Union and China ended up, with the highest number of casualties in the war: 24 and 20 million respectively. Germany lost 8.8 million (3rd place).
Numbers provided are source dependent, my source: https://www.nationalww2museum.org/students-teachers/student-resources/research-starters/research-starters-worldwide-deaths-world-war
Obviously, doctrine is not the only factor deciding number of casualties. High casualties for Soviet Union and China, were also result of harsh occupation by Germany and Japan and many Civilians loses. Many other aspects affected loses, but the point I want to make here, is that even though from militaristic point of view this doctrine might be well suited to Soviet Union I would have avoided it if I was commander, because I think there are better alternatives. In the game I decided to go for the doctrine based on Coordination between air force, artillery and special forces.
Mostly because of chosen doctrine, incompetence, lack of experience and indecisiveness of Soviet high command, in a lot of sectors retreat was not allowed, which resulted a lot of troops getting encircled in first few months of the war. The numbers of troops encircled were catastrophically high: 3.5 million prisoners of war in total. Only in Kiev according to Soviet sources 532 thousand people got encircled (667 thousand according to German sources). That is biggest encirclement in human history. Second place is Vyazma another 517 thousand people encircled (663 thousand according to German sources). Guess who got encircled in Vyazma again? Correct, Soviets!!! In fact, all top 5 places are hold by Soviet Union (all 5 happened in 1941). Apart from that, Soviet troops lost so many tanks in the first few days of the war, that in the Kiev pocket Germans only captured 50 tanks. This is extremely low: In comparison in Stalingrad Soviets captured 60 thousand Germans and more than 1200 tanks. 60 thousand troops had 1200 tanks, while under Kieve more than half a million had only 50 :(
After retreating 1200 km something has to be done to stop the enemy.                                                                      Order 227 was the special order by Stalin, famously known as “No step back”. Order was meant to stop constantly retreating Soviet army for last stand: last effort to stop conquerors. No more unnecessary retreating was allowed. Civilians, factory workers were conscripted for defense of the motherland. In Stalingrad there were even cases of tanks firing right from the factory windows, where they have been produced.
Not everyone followed the rules, but Soviet operative were there to punish. Whoever was caught retreating, was recruited in so called “Penal battalions” and sent to most risky locations in the frontline. Sometimes they even were used as “human shield wall”. But I guess similar measures are justified when you are fighting for survival.
Before the war most of Soviet Union’s industry was in European side. But as European side was partly conquered, Soviets needed to shift their economy eastwards. Just after Germany attacked, they undertook huge factory reallocation program, moving tools, machines from factories in Ukraine and Belarus and rebuilding them on the Eastern side. At the end even though they lost a large section of the country with a lot of factories during the first year of the war, they recovered 85% of factories. This is what allowed to continue production of equipment and later allowed counterattacks.
Partisans, propaganda, and supply issues for enemy
After occupation of Eastern part of Soviet Union, Nazi propaganda started portraying themselves as liberators. Picture below is taken in the Minsk, during a forced pro-German demonstration. Words on the picture say: “Hitler liberator” (btw it’s written асвабадитель not освободитель, so it’s either Belarusian [idk can’t confirm] or Germans were making grammatical mistakes on their propaganda posters :DDD)
But apparently when you portray yourself as liberator, but then start killing people, sending them to forced labor based on their national identity they don’t particularly trust you.
A lot of people found guns, ammunition and run to forests together with their families. There were even new settlements created in the forests. Partisan activity in occupied Soviet territory (especially Ukraine and Belarus) was impressively high and played a role perhaps not very decisive but definitely important to the overall war effort. In the game you can organize partisan activity, support them and they will blow up enemy supplies, give you more intel and even organize an uprising helping to liberate Soviet Union.
As you probably know, propaganda was a very important tool that the Soviet Union used extensively through media, books, films, theatre, etc. The use of propaganda was far from being Soviet-specific but, truth be told, Soviet propaganda was very characteristic.
In the game you can enact certain decisions to activate campaigns with specific bonuses. Pretty interesting system.
Overall Soviet propaganda is something really fascinating, that I think everyone interested can spend hours looking at. (Especially if u happen to know Russian hahaha)
This one is a British propaganda posterThis one is a British propaganda poster
This one is a British propaganda poster
This one is a British propaganda poster
When you think about fighting and war, you never first think of supply. The fact that food and ammunition doesn’t grow in the battlefield means, that it should be transported from core land. But sometimes transportation task might be as hard as fighting in the field. A scorched-earth policy (very common policy by both sides) is a military strategy that aims to destroy anything that might be useful to the enemy. Before retreating from provinces Soviets destroy railway stations, roads radio station, supply depos and everything that will slow enemy down. In fact, when retreating from Occupied land in 1943-44 Germans used same Scorched the Earth tactic (they were even burning down villages)
In fact, one of the main functions of partisans, was to sabotage infrastructure in the enemy backlines, in order to create supply issues for them.
Another factor creating supply issues will be weather. Heavy rains create mud, while heavy snow will block roads.  People defending their homeland are more accustomed to cold winter, or mudy fall, but for invaders that created huge supply issues. They struggled to properly supply their troops form 1941 October to December. And that will be one of the reasons while despite initial success Moscow offensive failed.
This picture probably is one of my favorite photos of the war: showing not only warfare but also “non-military” side of the war.
Operation Bagration in my universe
As Guderian (German general) once said, after loosing battle against Soviet army:
“They are learning”
Super deep World War 2 quotes, 1942 [colorized]
After early failures, Soviets improved drastically: battle hardened soldiers and generals, improved tactics. So called “Lessons of war” teached them how to fight and win. Operation Bagration was one of the most successful operations in human war history, ending German occupation of Soviet territory and resulting in enemy’s retreat to prewar borders.
There is another interesting game based on events during operation Bagration - Steel division 2 (This game concentrates more in micro strategizing in the battlefield). Here we won’t go into details of Operation Bagration, but rather we will look, how I was able to carry out similar operation in an imaginary world to encircle German troops.
During the game Germans tried to encircle Soviet divisions around Zhytomyr. And this is a constant strategy throughout the war. It’s not about pushing entire front forward all at once, because that’s not very efficient. To push, enemy tries to find weak spots to prob for those weak spots and when they break through, they try to join two salients together and encircle entire frontline. (Shown with red arrows on the picture below)
In this potential encirclement German land forces also cut railway line from Kiev. (Shown with red X-sign on the picture below) During 2nd world war most of soldiers were supplied with railway, that was the most efficient way to supply armies in a long distance. Aircrafts (transport planes) were faster, but could transfer less supplies and were more expensive, while trucks or horses couldn’t transfer long distances as trains could. Cutting railway road sometimes meant, that divisions not receiving supply would attrition, form lack of food and ammunition. In the picture below attrition is shown by the red color. In order to be able to resupply troops in a full scale, we need to construct new railway road connecting Minsk to Zhytomyr (shown with black arrow on the image below). With the help of our heroic workers, we were able to rebuild railway road, get supplied, and now we could think about counterattacking.
One thing to know about salients is that if initially it’s not successful to surround you, and you stabilize the front, you can counter-attack and surround enemy on your own. It’s kind of double game, where they can surround you, but also you can cut them off.
(Counterattack plan shown with the pink line on the picture)
As planned operation was successful and German army got encircled.
Obviously controlling troops in real life is much more complicated, than in the game, but generally problem in any modern war is similar: try to cut off your enemy from its supply lines, without letting them cut you off from yours.  I hope with this example I was able to present and explain macro strategizing during major wars.
The rest is just summarized with the following meme:
When you can manage entire Soviet-German frontline, but can’t manage 5 minutes conversation with a girlWhen you can manage entire Soviet-German frontline, but can’t manage 5 minutes conversation with a girl
When you can manage entire Soviet-German frontline, but can’t manage 5 minutes conversation with a girl
When you can manage entire Soviet-German frontline, but can’t manage 5 minutes conversation with a girl
Here's an interesting quote about encirclements in war:
"A peculiarity of any encirclement battle… is that a on the front line an enormous breach is created, which either requires a large number of reserves to be put into battle to plug the gap or requires a consolidating front to be extended on both sides of the void that has formed.
The encirclement… of the 6th Army… led to precisely this situation."
Alexei Isaev, “The battle of Kharkov”
After the encirclement and surrender of the German 6th Army in Stalingrad (btw first encirclement and surrender in whole German militaristic history since 1800), Germany lost the initiative in the war. I mentioned Stalingrad multiply times because I want to emphasize, how important was that victory and how hard was that to achieve. Fighting for every street, every floor of the buildings. There were multiple cases for “cake fighting”: when 1st and 3rd floors were under German control, while Soviets continued resistance on the 2nd floor. Warfare in Stalingrad, Germans were calling “rat warfare”. Here technological superiority won’t matter, the winner will always be the soldier who is smarter, braver, trickier, more ingenious (Is this how heaven looks like?)
Anyways, after this glorious victory Soviet Union continued fighting desperately for another 3 years to raise flag over Berlin. But this war was never fought with honor from German side. When Soviet troops entered Nazi concentration camps in Poland world saw crimes they never expected (they knew that innocent people were being killed based on their national identity, but no one expected everything to be so extreme). Thousands of fresh killed human bodies were found rotting Auschwitz concentration camp (biggest concentration camp in human history) no one to bury them. Millions of people including children, pregnant women, elderly were used as forced labor. During occupation of Ukraine, population of Ukraine dropped 4 times, due to the killing of civilian population and deportation to work in Germany. Killed were not only Jews but also Poles, Russians, Ukrainians, Belarussians, Serbs, etc. We all should be grateful to those, who gave their lives to stops crimes against humanity.
Sorry for including this picture: It is terrifying but trust me there are pictures worse than this one.
We should end this on a happy note, for those who fought through enemy trenches and reached last paragraph. I was planning to finish this “class-report thingy” by Christmas, but since gameplay took longer, and later I was lazy to write everything down, I ended up doing most of the writing yesterday. Yet I want to finish this “class-report thingy” with the same Christmas celebration quotes by the Franklin Roosevelt, since I find the quote is very epic and heroic.
“I cannot say “Merry Christmas” – for I think constantly of those thousands of soldiers
and sailors who are in actual combat throughout the world – but I can express to you my
thought that this is a happier Christmas than last year in the sense that the forces of
darkness stand against us with less confidence in the success of their evil ways.”
Franklin Roosevelt, December 1942
Some honorable mentions
German kids and Königstiger (Tiger II): infinite love inside a single photo
Kronach, Germany 1945... And now.
Always wanted to find a place to take a similar photo. But I want to find it alone, so that the place isn’t popular. There was one palace in St. Petersburg (Peterhof) that was destroyed by Nazis during occupation, and I have been there, but the photo comparing before and now is actually pretty famous (it is even provided in the museum). So, this isn’t something I came up myself originally.  I hope next “class-report thingy” will start with my own image.
